[Music]
but then in the 999
the real honour to first of all to
congratulate the University on its
amazing accomplishments in precision
medicine which are in the past but also
about to begin now with this astonishing
series of collaborations that have been
launched so congratulations to all of
you I was at dinner last night hearing
about all the new initiatives that will
begin across the university across the
collaborative campuses and really make
Chicago and the University at one of the
hubs proud hubs of precision medicine in
the country obviously I'm an oncologist
and I want to give you a sense of what
precision medicine looks like from the
perspective of cancer so I'll focus on
cancer in particular my area is
leukemias and lymphomas although I
certainly see breast cancers and other
cancers but remember that this kind of
idea I think is probably quite general
for medicines that cancer is a model by
which precision medicine will be brought
about in the world partly of course
because cancer is such a powerfully
genetic illness the influence of genes
is so powerful so let me begin by
identifying a kind of a moment to start
the discussion with rudolph workout
Bercow as many of you know was a famous
pathologist and as a young man workout
made the striking discovery that
regardless of the tissue origin whether
it was rain or whether it was lung
whether it was liver etc that cancers
were characterized by a very common
phenomenon that common phenomena was the
was the fact that cells were dividing
abnormally they were growing abnormally
normally where they should not have been
growing and that they had refused to
respect the normal boundaries of
cellular growth the normal boundaries of
cellular control now
that itself was of course a radical and
important observation they had been all
sorts of theories of cancer before
workout but welcome made a second
observation what a second observation
was that he made the argument that all
cells came from other cells
so if that's true if also had to come
from other souls then it's a factor it
has to be also true that a cancer cell
must arise from from a normal cell and
if that's true if it's true that the
cancer cell must arise from a normal
cell then something must have happened
to a normal cell to convert it into a
cancer cell just from simple
observations were covered essentially
created a a transformative theory of
cancer that some event occurred in a
normal cell that allowed this normal
cell to fail to obey the boundaries of
normal growth normal metabolism normal
occupation of tissue space break those
boundaries and begin to proliferate and
grow abnormally that process was
eventually called transformation but no
one knew what transformation was and the
question that you could ask yourself
sitting today was is it true that in all
the transformations that occurred breast
in lung and blood etc all these
different kinds of cancers in the same
process is it different processes and
Xterra that if they're different
processes should the same medicine we
apply to them are different medicines
you apply to them so in other words
astonishingly the whole root of what we
now think about a targeted therapies and
cancer and similarly precision medicine
in cancer is rooted in the idea of
cancer itself it comes from the very
very earliest way of thinking about
cancer and they're riddles and puzzles
that were raised at that time I'm going
to try to move on to the next idea which
is again the question of what was
transformation then if that was the case
what was the what was the cause of
transformation and there were four major
clues and you could imagine that there
were four sort of battling clues because
there seemed to be four sides the same
problem you think about the proverbial
elephant and the blind man in this case
it was in this case it was it was cancer
and blind scientists trying to figure
out what was the what was that
transformation process what had led this
perfectly good citizen cell to become
now a bad citizen cell and obviously one
major source potential was rarity that's
a picture of hilarious
juju via the Brazilian ophthalmologist
who made the point that cancer at least
in his case a retinal blastoma retinal
cancer seemed to run in families so he
had observed one family where it was a
very clear hereditary pattern so he knew
that heredity had had to do something
with this even before the Brazilian
ophthalmologist
Percival thought in the in the in in
England had very clearly observed that
aside from cancer running in families so
this was earlier personal applauded
observed that certain professions were
highly likely to get certain cancers and
in Percival Pott case it was Chimney
Sweeps were very highly likely to get
screwed ear cancer young men who swept
chimneys were very likely by a factor of
you know there was it stuck out
epidemiologically like a sore thumb the
idea that young men with chimney
sweeping as the profession needs to have
a huge huge high incidence of stroke
cancer so clearly the environment had a
role there was a role of chance in some
families for instance with breast cancer
not all women would get breast cancer
that was one observation but also some
women would get breast cancer quite late
some would get early no one exactly knew
what the what the role was and then
Peyton Rous in New York had observed
that at least in animal models he could
use viruses to create cancer so there
was a question which of these four
causes was the real root cause of cancer
and how how could that possibly be
related to this phenomenon of
transformation and the solution to that
came in a kind of blazing important news
in the 1970s and 1980s and it was a very
simple idea and that idea was genes so
in other words alterations in growth
controlling genes cause cancer now we
know it a little bit more broadly we
think that alterations and growth
metabolism differentiation anything that
ultimately impinges on a decision of a
cell to divide or to grow alterations in
those genes cause cancer this was work
done by many people are just outlined
some people here Hera Varmus and Michael
Bishop but vogelstein Janet Rowley Bob
Weinberg
several laboratories contributed to this
idea but ultimately
was it converged as I said on the on a
simple thought that and that explained
this conundrum because of course you can
you can inherit the genes you can get it
from your parents
hence cancer is running in families like
Braca one for instance retinoblastoma
you can get the genes from the e Buchan
the genes can be mutated by the
environment so the environment
carcinogens in fact Percival Pott coined
the term carcinogen you can have
environmental agents that make the genes
alter mutate and thereby cause cancer
John plays a role because when cells
divide they can make errors and in a
when you make an error you can introduce
a mutation and thereby cause cancer and
viruses can bring the same genetic
information into the cell or disrupt the
genetic information of a cell and
thereby cause the same process all of a
sudden this seemingly mystery of
multiple causes converged on a very
simple idea and that is that a
distortion of normalcy the very genes
that control normal growth in
development if you disrupt them if you
distort them by mutations then you will
essentially unleash the malignant
process answering virchow's riddle of
transformation that was all very good
news so the 1970s 1980s was mostly a
news that really consolidated the field
and made it possible to think about the
field in a more sort of homogeneous
systematic enter and consolidated manner
then there was a series of questions
that begins our sort of more
contemporary era of cancer and I'm going
to pause I'm going to continue our for
the thought here so again so alterations
in growth controlling genes cause cancer
and the question was how many and how
common so for instance is it one gene
for cancer if you look across multiple
cancers is it the same gene what is the
relationship then between genes and
cancers if you understand that there are
many many different kinds of cancers in
the world and of course there are about
23,000 odd genes that that we have as
humans so how would you put these two
pieces together and and the idea the
first idea came from work done by
several people this is from Bert
vogelstein group and that was that one
gene was not sufficient so and for most
cancers although there exceptions to
this
for most cancers you had to have a multi
many gene set to be mutated often
sequentially to cause to ultimately
cause cancer vogelstein
occasionally you know has described
these diagrams it's a kind of malignant
flouts you know you start with one end
you know one mutation in a gene will
cause abnormalities in a cell but that's
usually not enough a cell doesn't wake
up one morning get a mutation and
immediately turn into a malignant cell
it has to go through a multi-step
process many genes have to be mutated
and we now know that therefore every
given cancer multiple genes this happens
to be a one clutch cascade in colon
cancer so now you can ask the beginnings
of the question which will animate I
hope this discussion which is okay so we
now know that many genes cause
ultimately responsible for the eventual
development of malignancy how are these
genes different or similar across
various malignancies and within a single
malignancy everyone with me so far
because here's that's actually a very
very important question so again to
clarify the question if you take ten
specimens of breast cancer we know that
there are many genes that will be
involved in those ten specimens of
breast cancer are they the same are they
different how do they mix and match with
each other
okay so I made a schematic here again
just to reach a broader audience but we
will talk about some of these in much
greater detail so here's the schematic
is here's a woman and who say who has
breast cancer and you have the capacity
as we do to put a dot and you can
imagine her whole entire genome is on
this sheet of blank paper criss-crossing
like a snake all the genes in her genome
criss-crossing like a snake from gene
one on chromosome one to the last gene
hypothetically on the last chromosome on
that last edge of the paper not drawn to
scale obviously and you have the
capacity of putting a dot where every
gene is mutated in her breast cancer so
this is her fingerprint as it were of
her breast cancer a second woman walks
into the clinic into the same interior
same clinic maybe has exactly the same
kind of tumor at least in terms of
pathological criteria looks the same
under the microscope is
10 centimeters or 6 centimeters big same
right breath same quadrant etc you
perform the same genetic fingerprinting
and now you begin to see an interesting
and important pattern and that is that
you'll see some genes that are common
between these two cancers but some genes
that are different between these two
cancers in terms of the mutations that
these two cancers have and here's a
third example bone and in this case
there's actually even more differences
so although there are some commonalities
between these three individual specimens
of breast cancer we only talk about
breast cancer there are also some
striking and important differences and
you can begin to organize these in ways
that are that basically take the more
common genes and make big Peaks out of
them the less common genes and make
small Peaks out of them we've done this
work in leukemia we've also done this
work in lymphoma
this has been a worldwide effort to try
to cat characterize and capture the
level of genetic diversity within a
single tumor subclass and you get a map
that looks like this with big Peaks and
small Peaks and in actuality this is
from global streams paper from Brits
paper but there are other examples of
this for colorectal cancer 38 specimens
here and and and the peaks and troughs
look like this so you have very common
mutations that are common across
multiple cancers multiple specimens of
the same cancer pardon me you have so
those are the big Peaks the intermediate
sized Peaks and small Peaks for the
unique ones now it's important to
remember that these big Peaks are almost
certainly I'm saying almost and I'll
come back to that almost certainly
involved in the drive as driving
mutations in cancer in other words
they're almost certainly involved in
driving the behavior of the cancer cell
the small mutations are much more
mysterious
they're obviously present much more
rarely present in one particular cancer
not other cancers but they may also be
responsible for the behaviors of that
one particular cancers very important to
remember that idea and one of the big
tasks within the cancer world ask me to
figure out the role of each one
individual mutation in driving the
behavior of that cancer so let's let's
let that progress for a moment and focus
on those big Peaks those big Peaks as I
said if we could target those big Peaks
how using medicines we would have
personalized medicines for that cancer
that mutation targeted in one particular
cancer should if successful be able to
change the behavior of the cancer cell
and hopefully have therapeutic effect
this is just basically the same
information this is from our own work in
leukemia showing the same information
I'm going to not going to dwell on that
for a second so but going back to this
idea of targeting a I've used just the
same schematic of colorectal cancer
although obviously the spectrum of
mutations is different in different
tumors and this is an example that we
began to see in the 1990s and 2000's of
being able to target with exquisite
specificity these driving mutations in
particular cancers and there's probably
no better example of this than chronic
myelogenous leukemia CML a disease that
I treat this is a picture of Brian
Druker one of the physician scientists
who really began this research program
is a very wide research program many
other people involved but druker and
others showed that if you if you use
this molecule called Gleevec you could
essentially inhibit the gene product
made by this mutation it happens to be a
fusion product and if you inhibited that
much like a lock to a key a precise lock
precise key you could turn off that key
this this compound by the way is it is
synthesized by human beings doesn't
exist in nature it's an astonishing
thing human beings made that made that
sort of key to that lock and you get
profound effects on the cancer here is
actually from the typical trial it's a
little dark so I'll just pointed out to
you from the trivial trial off using the
usage of imaginable Gleevec in in
chronic myelogenous leukemia survival
curves looking at on one hand
you know the inexorable death of
patients these are kaplan-meier survival
curves over time on the x-axis and the
percentage of people alive on the y-axis
and you see that in with standard
chemotherapy you'd get terrible survival
most of the people would be dead in
about five years
but with rebec it's really a flat line
so this is a totally transformative
effect on on this particular leukemia
and and continues to be transformative
today
this kind of idea was then repeated in
the 2000s by a host of other drugs this
is an example of another one this again
using the same schematic this is a drug
that targets her2 gene amplification in
breast cancer a substantial fraction of
breast cancer as the gene application
her - this is the patient zero or one of
the patients here this is actually the
first woman to enroll in the trial of
Herceptin the drug that targets that
gene amplification her name is barbara
Bradfield she had metastatic her2
positive breast cancer was treated she
was the first person on trial and
astonishingly still alive today so this
is her 18th year of profound remission
from her metastatic her2 positive breast
cancer wanted one of the most striking
cases happened to be one of the first
cases and then this of course is the
data from that pivotal trial for
Herceptin in her2 positive breast cancer
and shows very clearly on the right side
patients treated versus patients not
treated now remember two points here the
point number one is that in order to
even qualify for this trial you had to
have Herceptin age' to have her to
positive breast cancer in other words
already the idea was that there was a
match between the kind of breast cancer
that you had it's molecular markers it's
genetic markers in this case her2 and
the fact that you were responsive to
that if you used
Herceptin on patients who don't have
this marker and this gene amplification
of course the made medicine won't work
so this is really much like Gleevec one
of the earliest examples of the power of
precision medicine at work because you
begin to see that if you appropriately
match a good drug to a appropriately
matched genetically matched tumor you
get two found effects that's the good
news the bad news is that as you can see
in the pivotal trial if you had
metastatic her2 positive breast cancer
metastatic so spread all over your
spread in multiple sites in your body
then although you get clearly a response
to Herceptin nonetheless even then after
about 50 months or 60 months of
treatment you
even those patients relapse and many of
them will die as a consequence of their
breast cancer so there are two
principles that come up here number one
is that at least in these early trials
targeting is essential but targeting is
not enough so we have to somehow manage
to move the move the compass beyond just
single targets or genetic targets in
that particular cancer and I'm going to
now talk about what what happened to the
next as we move forward the first thing
that became clear is that if you now two
patients who did not have metastatic
breast cancer so whose cancer had not
spread in other words if you detected
those early enough so that it was local
tumor removed it and then gave Herceptin
all of a sudden you begin to see in
contrast to this pardon me it is sad but
unfortunate although as I said
successful trial with Herceptin you
began to see really important impressive
successes so this is Herceptin after
surgical removal in contrast so this is
essentially if you'd think about
conceptually early detection or pre-med
aesthetic detection followed by the use
of a targeted therapy and now you begin
to see powerful successes so here you
have on the right this is again the
across from 2005 has been repeated
several times now you begin to see 90%
or even 95% survival rates and 85%
disease-free survival rates at five
years and even ten years up to Herceptin
a treatment for her to positive breast
cancer so what have we done here we have
taken two paradigms very important
paradigms early detection or early or
appropriate detection couple that with a
molecular targeted therapy and that's
been a success story and I want you to
remember that because we will come back
at the end of the top-two that paradigm
over and over again how do we get there
how do we get to the place in cancer
that we can couple the appropriate
detection of a tumor as early as
possible and couple that with a
molecular targeted therapy because it
seems to me that that's where precision
medicine for cancer in particular will
be and should be going so the question
is okay those were great examples so we
had an example of Gleevec 4c
or magnet for CML imatinib is the
formulary name for evac Herceptin for
her2 positive breast cancer and those
were great examples because those were
tumors where a target was clearly
available so you had her too he found a
medicine for it if you detected the
tumor early enough then you could then
it would be surprisingly successful
similarly we Gleevec if you found if you
could find the mutation BCR Abel you use
Gleevec particularly in the chronic
phase of the disease again very
successful but not every tumor as we did
more and more genetic sequencing not
every tumor turns out to have such a
readily available target so this is from
our work in leukemia this is a typical
panel that we get none of these have
currently any targeted therapies
available so that's the second question
that's being thrown up what if you don't
have a target that's available what
happens then well we started exploring
answers to that question as well and the
answer to that question lies somewhat in
going back again to this this gene at
the gene panel as it were to the
mutational spectrum so it turns out
obviously that genes in cells don't live
in isolation they communicate with each
other in pathways and certain pathways
are active these pathways for instance
will take signals from the surface of
the cell down to the nucleus or from the
nucleus and and affect the metabolism
and growth of the cells the genes
themselves may not be mutated but
sometimes the pathways may be active in
a cancer so I'll give you an analogy
that will help you think about this in a
second but one way to think about this
is that not only are there obviously
mutations that are specific to cancer we
talked about that already but in fact in
every cancer cell there are pathways
that are activated these pathways for
instance are consuming resources they're
forcing the cell to grow despite the
fact that their signals may be signals
in the environment to tell the cell to
stop growing and what if even if you
couldn't target the individual mutated
genes what if you could target the
pathways and again one way to think
about this and it's helpful to think
about this is think about the cell as a
complex machine this complex machine
obviously in a cancer cell in this
complex machine has certain parts
are broken and we talked about this
already mutations but these mutations
these broken pieces don't live in
isolation they communicate with each
other giving rise to complicated
networks or giving lives too complicated
pathways case maybe and I've isolated
one portion of the machine that may be
responsible for instance for immunise
cake another portion of the machine
that's responsible for growth some other
portion that's responsible for
metabolism and so forth so what if we
could now rather than targeting the
mutations as with imatinib or with
Herceptin if you could now basically cut
off or switch off these more complex
network problems so it's an analogy that
engineers and certainly biologists
should get very easily because it
happens all the time in any complex
system and this has been these sort of
pathways or arenas have been described
as the hallmarks of cancer this list is
constantly expanding I think about eight
or ten in this particular list but
really have been described as various
ways in which cancer cells really differ
from normal physio the normal physiology
of the cells and the question is could
you now essentially target one or two
pieces of this so this led to a very
very powerful idea in the 2000s which
was okay let's now essentially
characterize cancers along these
hallmark pathways and try to now direct
therapies against these hallmark
pathways not BCR Abel and Gleevec for
chronic myelogenous leukemia let's go
beyond the surf Herceptin for her2
positive breast cancer or tamoxifen for
ER positive breast cancer let's think in
a big way let's let's lump all cancers
together all comers characterize them
based on their pathways their molecular
pathways that are abnormal and try to
direct therapy against that very
powerful idea and I would say a 1.0 idea
this first attempt to do this and this
was the so called Shiva trial ruling
should focus on this trial because it
tells us what to do and what not to do
in the future so this trial was carried
out in France had 741 patients and what
they did is that they did molecular
profiling of individual cancers and by
that I mean whether you had lung cancer
breast cancer brain cancer whatever kind
of cancer you had the
these cancers with profiles and the
doctor could decide you could choose he
or she could choose based on three
pathways to give you an appropriate drug
okay
note the difference between the
Herceptin trial and this kind of trial
and perception you're saying only breast
cancer you have to have that molecular
target her to you get Herceptin
hopefully with early detection and you
move on to the trial right here we're
saying let's forget about all of that
let's take all cancers molecularly
profile then put them into three lumps
three categories and give the drugs
based on that everyone would be so far
so what was the result of that trial
it was profoundly negative so this was
the this was a it is surprising result
this was a 1.0 trial the surprising
result but basically if you if you use a
molecular targeted agent versus
treatment at physician choice number one
look at the rather dismal survival
curves and no difference and in fact if
you subdivided it by the pathway you
don't need to know the names of the
pathways
similarly really no signal may be a
little marginal signal for the third one
but no signal so what happened this is
that this is the moral lesson this is
where we need to move from so something
have must have happened we lost
information in moving from Herceptin
her2 positive breast cancer BCR Abel
positive leukemia to the big lumping so
we have to now go backwards and that's
where these initiatives that's why we're
here today we're here today to figure
out what to do next
there was led to a big editorial called
sitting Shiva on the Shiva trial which
asks the question what went wrong why
could we not use this kind of idea to
lump all patients into the same sort of
big bucket categories and ask the
question could you deliver deliver
appropriate therapy well the answers
could be patients could develop
resistance drugs could be not potent
enough and the pot maybe we don't know
enough about offer these were only three
pathways you know there are hundreds in
an individual cancer cell so where do we
go from here well the answer is actually
already coming out from what's happening
number one is we have to go back
somewhat to remembering what the cancer
is it's we're not there yet that we can
sort of
really lumped together cancers based on
these simple understandings of pathways
and I'll tell you why that works so how
does that work so how do what do we do
exactly well one thing we've done is
we're going to think about as the
community is one drug is not enough so
what if you guys add combinations of
targeted therapies remember with
Herceptin or with Gleevec we're using
single agents for single mutations what
if we put in five or six or seven number
two what if we could use immune
therapies what we add to that with with
immune therapies obviously if we had
more potent inhibitors and in the last
case what if we had to just do test
every individual cancer empirically on a
case-by-case basis for its
susceptibility to one part to another in
fact the answer is we're doing all four
of these at the same time I'll give you
examples of all four of them as we
finish up combination therapy so does it
work well once again if you remember the
cancer for particular kinds of cancer if
you identify particular targets and
particular pathways it does tend to work
how do we know that we know that from
multiple myeloma
so modular model is a great example it's
the one tumor where in my law in the ten
years of my practice the combinations of
targeted therapies I said targeted
because again they're not specific to
the mutations but rather are targeting
pathways in the multiple myeloma cell
has been transformative how do we know
it's transformative if you had if you
had multiple myeloma we walked into the
clinic in 2001 before we had some of
these therapies with only one or two
your survival curve looks like that if
you were diagnosed between 2006 and 2010
your survival curve improves
dramatically obviously this is
retrospective data should be taken with
a little grain of thought if you walk
into the clinic with the same stage
model either neither matched for stage
by the way with the same stage multiple
myeloma in 2010 to 2016 that curve
flattens out to about 8 0.8 percentage
surviving progression free at five years
now why is that happening that's
happened because in multiple myeloma at
least we can use three four maybe even
five now targeted therapies in
combination single agents don't work
combinations agents do what's the moral
of that story we have to develop
combination agents for cancers that are
targeting individuals
for pathways and don't have overlapping
toxicities very very clear for multiple
myeloma okay
the second example is an example that's
really been raging through the
literature and that is what if we added
immune therapies to this and there are a
whole bunch of a variety of immune
therapies that won't dwell on all their
details but the essential idea is can we
make a cancer cell now visible again to
the immune system if so will the immune
system clear or eliminate the cancer
this is the trial that shows the success
of that therapy this is in
smoking-related headless or non small
cell lung cancer again that's a tumor
that I had not expected us to have a an
impact on during least in my lifetime
but a combination of targeted
immunological therapies in that case is
shown a remarkable effect and then the
possibility is to take individual
cancers and test them for individual
susceptibilities two drugs we are doing
that several other people are doing that
empirical testing of individual cancers
um you know we basically take an
individual cancer add in you know the
panoply of drugs that are available and
then try to return to those patients
there's a drug that only works for them
so where do we end up what's the moral
of the story here the moral of the story
here is that through all of this a kind
of picture is emerging for cancer
therapy and the picture that's emerging
is that again if we combine early
detection biological annotation and
personalized therapy then we tend to
have successes when one of the areas or
one of the nodes of this triangle goes
missing we don't tend to have successes
in therapy and the job of personalized
medicine and this is a challenge here is
not just to therefore think about
personalized therapy that's one end
that's one end of the triangle but you
really try to fill all the three ends of
the triangle as much as possible
obviously
early detection I should say prevention
because the more we silo personalized
medicine that the the history shows us
that the the chances are that we will
have lack of successes whereas if we
combine these sort of the triangle that
that's actually going to be hell
the question that all of this raises is
does this mean that we'll have to go
back to an area or go forward to an area
where every single cancer has to be
treated sort of this way found early
biologically annotated in a unique
combination of therapies will have to be
found for that cancer we don't know the
answer to the question we hope that in
this second phase as we move forward
again to shave a 2.0 or shiver 3.0 I'm
just using those three different names
for the trials as we move forward to
these trials that somehow or the other
we will begin to lump again so that we
can now re categorize the universe of
cancers along new axes and that will
help a lot otherwise you can imagine
daliyah the challenges of delivering
individualized therapies for
individualized cancers along this
triangle so so that's that's I think the
big moral of the story that this
requires a huge collaborative effort I
suspect that the that for instance early
in the early detection is an arena where
it's not just a biological problem it
but it might be a problem with imaging
it might be a problem with biomarker
discovery it might be a problem that
people from the people who work on on
nano systems what biology can help
because it seems to be a problem of a
different kind of scale the biological
annotation problem also seems to be a
problem that involves computational work
as much as deeply as just a biological
annotation and of course therapeutics
involves physicians and physician
scientists just to emphasize that that's
the kind of collaboration that we need
to move the clock forward in terms of in
terms of the next step I'm going to
leave you with one last slide which are
the challenges slide what happens what
are the what are the concerns here the
concerns of course are how do we counter
the cost you know this is a as we launch
this is this gigantic mission for cancer
therapy and for potentially other other
diseases how do we how on earth are we
going to manage if you have to deliver
this at a scale across the United States
how do we handle resistance is there a
maintenance schedule the patients have
responded to one particular personalized
therapy will they need other therapies
down the road
well those have creeper size as well and
a big question here which I've already
talked about you know if you find the
tumor early enough can you really dial
that backwards until you get to the role
of prevention so again huge
congratulations to the involvement in
the effort but I wanted to show you what
the roadmap for cancer has looked like
through its history through its recent
history and highlights from the
challenges and provide what I think
might be an appropriate sort of what I
call a triangle where you might be able
to get the kind of we might be able to
get the kind of astonishing responses
that we hope to get in personalized
therapy thank you very much
[Applause]